People know they’re going to die,” Morrie said, “but nobody believes it. If only we did, we would do things differently.” “So we kid ourselves about death,” I said. “Yes, but there’s a better approach: to know you’re going to die, and to be prepared for it at any time. That’s better. That way, you can actually be more involved in your life while you’re living.” “How can you ever be prepared to die?” I asked. “Do what the Buddhists do. Every day, have a little bird on your shoulder that asks, ‘Is today the day? Am I ready? Am I doing all I need to do? Am I being the person I want to be?’” He turned his head to his shoulder as if the bird were there now. “Is today the day I die?” he asked. “The truth is, Mitch,” he said, “once you learn how to die, you learn how to live.” I nodded. “I’m going to say it again,” he said. “Once you learn how to die, you learn how to live.” He was making sure I absorbed this point, without embarrassing me by asking if I had really got it. It was part of what made him a good teacher. “Did you think much about death before you got sick?” I asked. “No,” Morrie smiled. “I was like everyone else. I once told a friend of mine, in a moment of exuberance, ‘I’m gonna be the healthiest old man you’ve ever met!’ ” “How old were you?” I asked. “In my sixties,” Morrie smiled again. “So you were optimistic,” I said. “Why not?” Morrie replied. “Like I said, people don’t really believe they’re going to die.” “But everyone knows someone who has died,” I said. “Why is it so hard to think about dying?” “Because,” Morrie continued, “most of us all walk around as if we’re sleepwalking. We really don’t experience the world fully, because we’re half asleep, automatically doing the things we think we have to do.” “And facing death changes all that?” I asked. “Oh, yes. You strip away all that stuff and you focus on the essentials,” he said. “When you realize you are going to die, you see everything much differently.” He sighed. “Learn how to die, and you learn how to live.” I noticed that he quivered now when he moved his hands. His glasses hung around his neck, and when he lifted them to his eyes, they slid around his temples as if he were trying to put them on someone else in the dark. I reached over to help guide them onto his ears. “Thank you,” Morrie whispered. He smiled when my hand brushed up against his head. The slightest human contact was immediate joy. “Mitch,” he said. “Can I tell you something?” “Of course,” I replied. “You might not like it,” he cautioned. “Why not?” I asked. “Well, the truth is,” he began, “if only you really listened to that bird on your shoulder and accepted that you could die at any time, then you might not be as ambitious as you are.” I forced a small grin. “The things you spend so much time on—all this work you do—might not seem as important,” he continued. “You might have to make room for some more spiritual things.” “Spiritual things?” I asked. “You hate that word, don’t you?” Morrie said. “ ‘Spiritual.’ You think it’s touchy-feely stuff.” “Well,” I said. He tried to wink, a bad try, and I burst into laughter. “Mitch,” he said, laughing along, “even I don’t know what ‘spiritual development’ really means. But I do know we’re deficient in some way. We are too involved in materialistic things, and they don’t satisfy us. The loving relationships we have, the universe around us, we take these things for granted.” He nodded toward the window with the sunshine streaming in. “You see that? You can go out there, outside, anytime. You can run up and down the block and go crazy. I can’t do that. I can’t go out. I can’t run. I can’t be out there without fear of getting sick. But you know what? I appreciate that window more than you do.” “Appreciate it?” I asked. “Yes,” Morrie said. “I look out that window every day. I notice the change in the trees and how strong the wind is blowing. It’s like I can see time passing through that windowpane. Because I know my time is almost done, I am drawn to nature like I’m seeing it for the first time.” He stopped, and for a moment we both looked out the window. I tried to see what he saw. I tried to see time and seasons, and my life passed in slow motion. Morrie dropped his head slightly and curled it toward his shoulder. “Is it today, little bird?” he asked. “Is it today?”